## Why I work in Finance
#### 8/13/2022 - Kyle McVeigh
[Go back to all articles](../../)

I've parked my career at the intersection of finance and computer science and I have no plans on changing that. This is where my interest and skills align and I think working in finance is one of the most fascinating disciplines at the moment. Computer science cuts across all industries and a good computer scientist can pick their cross-discipline and I couldn't be happier with my choice. Let me provide some background on how I got here and why I think studying finance today is equivalent to studying physics in the early 20th century. 

### Early Influences 
My mother learned computer science in the early 80s and was a programmer when I was a child. She taught me an early interest in computer science and I always considering myself a computer wiz as a kis. My father was, and still is, my hero and he was an accountant by trade. I always thought I'd follow in his footsteps and be a business person. Math and science classes came easy to me and I've always been a naturally curious person. 

One of my favorite classes in highschool was an advanced level Physics class my senior year. I had an amazing professor and I found that physics came so easily for me. I remember learning these simple formulas and thinking, God must be mathematician. I really thought I'd be a rocket science and actually applied and was accepted to Purdue's Mathematics of Aerospace Engineering program. 

### Physics, Computer Science, and Reality
I didn't go to Purdue due my decision mostly around athletics and instead I went to William and Mary, a liberal art school in Virginia. Walking onto campus I planned to study physics and computer science and registered for as many of those classes as I could my freshman year. I hated these early classes. I found the computer science classes far to academic and not interesting. This was not the fun coding my mom showed me as a child. I found the professors to be cold and more interested in their own research then teaching. The classes required a mandatory lab time in a classroom in the center of the building that had no windows with these ancient linux computers that barely functioned and used an archaic networking system for submitting work. Meanwhile I found my physics professors fantastic, but those classes were discouraging. I learned physics was hard. It wasn't hard in a manageable way, it was hard in the 'this is a mature field and we actually only have a few unknowns that is going to take a team of the smartest scientist in the world working in a lab for a century to make any progress on' hard. Seeing how difficult physics was going to be to push the field forward and my own ambitions made those classes a slog. 

I reluctantly took some business classes. I didn't want to be a business bro. I didn't want to end up a middle manager staring a monitor making PowerPoints around made up concepts in some middle market American city. I wanted to be a scientist working on new problems that effected people where I could make an impact

### The Breakthrough and Green Pasters 
For my first finance class I had an amazing professor who was young, relatable, and a realist. On the first class he said, I'm not going to recommend a textbook, most finance textbooks are boring, elementary and expensive, you should be able to find all the material better online and for free. Instead he optionally recommended a long list of non-finance related novels about the the history of finance. I went to the library and checked out the shortest of these I could find: When Genius Failed by Lowenstein, published in 2000. I was blown away and instantly hooked on learning as much as I could about finance. 

The book details the history of Long Term Capital Management and its founders, Meriwether, Scholes, and Black and their discovery, exploration and exploitation of their own Black-Scholes formula and using it to profit in the derivative market. The book details how derivatives had existed for hundreds, if not thousands, of years in the farming industry but it was largely unknown how to set these price. Derivates pricing was an art more than a science and the formulas associated with it took dozens of inputs in proprietary weights by the market participates. Black and Scholes took inspiration from an old formula used in chemistry, further simplified it, and seemingly cracked the code in pricing derivatives. They quickly became some of the richest people in the world and their efficiency in pricing risk actually allowed McDonalds to begin offering chicken nuggets as they could buy chickens as a consistently predictable price. Their story does not have a happy ending. Their Black-Scholes formula assumed finance existed on a standard bell curve. It was discovered in 1998 during the Russian financial crisis that finance actually exist on a T-curve. It absolutely blew my mind that in was only in the late in the 20th century that humanity learned to price derivative and that finance happens on a T-curve. These both felt like to me elementary building blocks and proved to me just how little we know about finance. 

I went down the rabbit hole and read the remaining non-fiction novels on my professors list. I read Against the Gods by Bernstein and learned how [Ursury](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usury) prevented us from learning about the correlation between risk and reward in finance until the 15th century. I read the Snowball by Schroeder about how Buffett figured out that values out performs growth and equities out perform credit over the long term. These lessons and others similar reinforced my believe that studying finance was a green paster than has so much left to learn and prove out.

### My role and more tough realities 

### Closing remarks 
It really does feel like we know nothing about finance. Even in the last decade we've seen the invention of cryptocurrencies, negative interest rates, and modern monetary theory. These are all massive new ideas and it isn't clear to anyone how they're are all going to play out. Surely in the next decade we'll get even more interest ideas that will be put to practice. Finance touches nearly all aspects of our life and we're still in early days of figuring it out. It is exciting and challenging to work in an ever changing field and I'm happy to think about that everyday. 