## Traits the best managers I know have
#### 7/8/2025 - Kyle McVeigh
[Go back to all articles](../../)

I previously wrote a blog post titled [Traits the best coders I know have](https://www.kylehasablog.com/posts/traits_the_best_coders_i_know_have/) and I thought I'd write a follow up on the traits the best managers I know have. I've had an interesting career: I've worked for sales managers, bankers, engineers, and even executives. Across my career I've had some managers personally who have made a huge impact on me and I've seen even more from my peers across all my employers. Below is an incomplete list of similarities I've seen from the best managers:

### Empathetic 
If I could instill a single trait to a manager trying to up-level, it would be to increase their empathy. Just as having a great palette is always additive to a chef, having more empathy is always additive as a manager. Managers are responsible for managing people, and people are hard. People are unique and each of us have our own story and the best way to understand how to connect with people and their stories is through empathy. Empathy is hard to up-level but it doesn't seem like it is considered enough as a qualification of managers so I want to bring it up as the first trait of great managers. Great managers lead with empathy and it is a gift to work for an empathetic manager. 

### Great teachers 
I've done a complete 180° on my thinking about this trait since starting my career. Previously, I was not considering if people were good teachers but instead I would solely focus on if they were more technically proficient than me. My logic was I wanted to work with the most technical people and I would pick up their skills by osmosis. I wanted to be in the room with the best engineers and I wanted to work alongside them and nothing else matter. I've learned that this thought process is shortsighted. I've found it is hard or even impossible to learn from a person who is a poor teacher or even worse doesn't want to teach. It is extremely frustrating and a detrimental place to be working for a manager who is gate keeping their knowledge and trying to maximize their own job security. I want to be learning throughout my career and I want to be growing each year as a person. This means that I want to align myself with managers who want to teach me and are great teachers. That might mean great managers are not always the most technically proficient, but they always make me better. Maybe they can teach me how to be kinder or maybe they can teach me how to find the specific technical person I need to unlock my learnings, but they will teach me and I will grow and that makes them great managers. 

### Excellent stewards of their report's careers
Great managers do a great job of managing their report's career. They elevate the status of their team and give them opportunities to share their accomplishments. They understand the firm's incentive structure and are transparent about that process. This is hard and requires a careful balance between the firm's incentives and their reports, but managers make that process fair and that is the minimum bar required by good managers. 

### Even keeled
With seniority comes the expectation of a long-term vision and remaining even keeled throughout the execution of that vision. This is difficult when managing people throughout that process, but even keeled managers are surely better to work for than managers that add instability throughout that process. The good news is that managers that don't have this trait tend to get worked out quickly or can get specific manager training on how to better act during times of uncertainty. 

### Deep understanding across the firm
A superpower of great managers is their understanding of their employer. They understand the goals of the firm, how to navigate the company with success, and understand what the business looks like in a year, three years, or even five years. They know how their product is going to change, how their customers are going to evole, and can position themselves and their reports correctly in an ever fluid situation. 

### Popularity 
I wish there was a better word to describe this, but the best managers are popular. Their reputations proceed them and they're liked. My previous employer had a question we had to answer as part of the year-end-reviews: 'On a scale from 1 to 10, how excited would you be to be on a project with this person'. Great managers score high in this category, and everyone knows why. Great managers are a pleasure to work with: they're liked across teams, divisions, and seniority. They're so good at playing politics you don't even realize they're playing the game. It is hard to have actionable feedback on this item, but a good goal should be to aim at being good at the other categories on this list will and the popularity piece will fall into place. 

### Closing thoughts
Reading this list should not surprise anyone. I don't have any unique insight and the traits above are known traits that managers should strive for. I want to close this out and discuss [illusory superiority](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illusory_superiority) and how that relates to most short comings I've seen in managers. Illusory superiority is a cognitive bias where people tend to overestimate their qualities. The classic example is how literally 90% of people say they're an above average driver and they're similarly published figures regarding how people estimate their [morality](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11138757/). I encourage managers trying to up-level to be aware of this bias and try to overcome it with proven techniques. I would love to live in a world where more people knew they had room to grow by becoming more empathetic. 